Advanced vignette (#282)
insightsengineering/rbmi: vignettes/advanced.Rmd

)
```

# Introduction

The purpose of this vignette is to provide an overview of some more advanced features of the `rbmi` package. 
The sections of the vignette are relatively self-contained, i.e. readers should be able to jump directly to the section which covers the functionality that they are most interested in. 

# Data simulation using function `simulate_data()` {#sec:dataSimul}

In order to demonstrate the advanced functions we will first create a simulated dataset with the `rbmi` function `simulate_data()`.
The `simulate_data()` function generates data from a randomized clinical trial with longitudinal continuous outcomes and up to two different types of intercurrent events (ICEs).
One intercurrent event (ICE1) may be thought of as a discontinuation from study treatment due to study drug or condition related (SDCR) reasons.

> The other event (ICE2) may be thought of as discontinuation from study treatment due to not study drug or condition related (SDCR) reasons. 

Author: ```suggestion
The other event (ICE2) may be thought of as discontinuation from study treatment due to not study drug or condition related (NSDCR) reasons. 
```

> For the purpose of this vignette, we simulate data similarly to the simulation study reported in @Wolbers2021 (though we change some of the simulation parameters) and include only one  ICE type (ICE1).

Author: ```suggestion
For the purpose of this vignette, we simulate data similarly to the simulation study reported in @Wolbers2021 (though we change some of the simulation parameters) and include only one ICE type (ICE1).
```

# Set probability of discontinuation
probDisc_C <- 0.02
probDisc_T <- 0.03
or_outcome <- 1.10 # +1 point increase => +10% odds of discontinuation

# Set drop-out rate following discontinuation
prob_dropout <- 0.5

# Set simulation parameters of the control group
parsC <- set_simul_pars(
    mu = muC,
    sigma = Sigma,
    n = n,
    prob_ice1 = probDisc_C,
    or_outcome_ice1 = or_outcome,
    prob_post_ice1_dropout = prob_dropout
)

# Set simulation parameters of the intervention group
parsT <- parsC
parsT$mu <- muT
parsT$prob_ice1 <- probDisc_T

# Set assumption about post-ice trajectory
post_ice_traj <- "CIR"

# Simulate data
data <- simulate_data(
    pars_c = parsC,
    pars_t = parsT,
    post_ice1_traj = post_ice_traj
)

str(data)

# As a simple descriptive of the simulated data, summarize the number of subjects with ICEs and missing data 
data %>%
  group_by(id) %>%
  summarise(
    group=group[1],
    any_ICE=(any(ind_ice1==1)),
    any_NA = any(is.na(outcome))) %>%
  group_by(group) %>%
  summarise(
      subjects_with_ICE=sum(any_ICE),
      subjects_with_missings=sum(any_NA)
  )
```

> # Handling of observed post-ICE data in `rbmi` and imputation under CIR {#sec:postICEobs} 

Author: @wolbersm I think this section is general for reference-based imputation...
```suggestion
# Handling of observed post-ICE data in `rbmi` under reference-based imputation {#sec:postICEobs} 
```

We first report the code to set the variables of the imputation and analysis models. If you are not yet familiar with the syntax, we recommend that you first check the "quickstart" vignette (`vignette("quickstart", package = "rbmi")`).

```{r}
# Create data_ice including the subject's first visit affected by the ICE and the imputation strategy
# Imputation strategy for post-ICE data is CIR in the intervention group and MAR for the control group 
# (note that ICEs which are handled using MAR are optional and do not impact the analysis
#  because imputation of missing data under MAR is the default)
data_ice_CIR <- data %>%
  group_by(id) %>%
  filter(ind_ice1==1) %>% # select visits with ICEs
  mutate(strategy = ifelse(group == "Intervention","CIR","MAR")) %>%
  summarise(
    visit = visit[1], # Select first visit affected by the ICE
    strategy = strategy[1])

> # Compute endpoint of interest: change from baseline
> data$change <- data$outcome - data$outcome_bl
> 
> # Remove rows corresponding to baseline visits
> data <- data %>% filter(visit!="0")
> data$visit <- factor(data$visit, levels = unique(data$visit))

Author: ```suggestion
# Compute endpoint of interest: change from baseline and
# remove rows corresponding to baseline visits
data <- data %>% 
    filter(visit != 0) %>% 
    mutate(
        change = outcome - outcome_bl,
        visit = factor(visit, levels = unique(visit))
    )
```

library(ggplot2)

set.seed(122)

n <- 100
time <- c(0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12)

# Mean trajectory control
muC <- c(50.0, 51.66667, 53.33333, 55.0, 56.66667, 58.33333, 60.0)

# Mean trajectory intervention
muT <- c(50.0, 51.66667, 53.33333, 54.16667, 55.0, 55.83333, 56.66667)

# Create Sigma
sd_error <- 2.5
covRE <- rbind(
  c(25.0, 6.25),
  c(6.25, 25.0)
)

Sigma <- cbind(1, time / 12) %*% covRE %*% rbind(1, time / 12) + diag(sd_error^2, nrow = length(time))

# Set probability of discontinuation
probDisc_C <- 0.02
probDisc_T <- 0.03
or_outcome <- 1.10 # +1 point increase => +10% odds of discontinuation

# Set drop-out rate following discontinuation
prob_dropout <- 0.5

# Set simulation parameters of the control group
parsC <- set_simul_pars(
    mu = muC,
    sigma = Sigma,
    n = n,
    prob_ice1 = probDisc_C,
    or_outcome_ice1 = or_outcome,
    prob_post_ice1_dropout = prob_dropout
)

# Set simulation parameters of the intervention group
parsT <- parsC
parsT$mu <- muT
parsT$prob_ice1 <- probDisc_T

# Set assumption about post-ice trajectory
post_ice_traj <- "CIR"

# Simulate data
data <- simulate_data(
    pars_c = parsC,
    pars_t = parsT,
    post_ice1_traj = post_ice_traj
)

> str(data)

Author: I personally like more "head(data)" but not strong preference
```suggestion
head(data)
```

We first report the code to set the variables of the imputation and analysis models. If you are not yet familiar with the syntax, we recommend that you first check the "quickstart" vignette (`vignette("quickstart", package = "rbmi")`).

```{r}
# Create data_ice including the subject's first visit affected by the ICE and the imputation strategy
# Imputation strategy for post-ICE data is CIR in the intervention group and MAR for the control group 
# (note that ICEs which are handled using MAR are optional and do not impact the analysis
#  because imputation of missing data under MAR is the default)
data_ice_CIR <- data %>%
  group_by(id) %>%
  filter(ind_ice1==1) %>% # select visits with ICEs

>   mutate(strategy = ifelse(group == "Intervention","CIR","MAR")) %>%

Author: ```suggestion
  mutate(strategy = ifelse(group == "Intervention", "CIR", "MAR")) %>%
```

    vars = vars_an
)

pool_obj_CIR <- pool(ana_obj_CIR)
pool_obj_CIR
```

This last output gives an estimated difference of 
`r paste(formatC(pool_obj_CIR$pars$trt_6$est,format="f",digits=3)," (95% CI ", 
         formatC(pool_obj_CIR$pars$trt_6$ci[1],format="f",digits=3), " to ",
         formatC(pool_obj_CIR$pars$trt_6$ci[2],format="f",digits=3),")",sep="")`
between the two groups at the last visit with an associated p-value of 
`r ifelse(pool_obj_CIR$pars$trt_6$pval<0.001,"<0.001",formatC(pool_obj_CIR$pars$trt_6$pval,format="f",digits=3))`.

# Efficiently changing reference-based imputation strategies

The `draws()` function is by far the most computationally intensive function in `rbmi`.
In some settings, it may be important to explore the impact of a change in the
reference-based imputation strategy on the results.
Such a change does not affect the imputation model but it does
affect the subsequent imputation step. 
In order to allow changes in the imputation strategy without having to re-run the 
`draws()` function, the function `impute()` has an additional argument `update_strategies`.

However, please note that this functionality comes with some important limitations:

> As described at the beginning of Section \@ref(sec:postICEobs), post-ICE outcomes are included in the input dataset  for the base imputation model if the imputation method is `MAR` but they are excluded for  reference-based imputation methods (such as `CIR`, `CR`, and `JR`).

Author: ```suggestion
As described at the beginning of Section \@ref(sec:postICEobs), post-ICE outcomes are included in the input dataset  for the base imputation model if the imputation method is `MAR` but they are excluded for reference-based imputation methods (such as `CIR`, `CR`, and `JR`).
```

Therefore, `updata_strategies` cannot be applied if the imputation strategy is changed from a MAR to a non-MAR strategy in the presence of observed post-ICE outcomes. Similarly, a change from a non-MAR strategy to MAR triggers a warning in the presence of observed post-ICE outcomes because the base imputation model was not fitted to all relevant data under MAR.
Finally, `update_strategies` cannot be applied if the timing of any of the ICEs is changed (in argument `data_ice`) in addition to the imputation strategy.  

As an example, we described an analysis under a copy increments in reference (CIR) assumption in the previous section. Let's assume we want to change this strategy to a jump to reference imputation strategy for a sensitivity analysis. This can be efficiently implemented using `update_strategies` as follows: 

```{r}
# Change ICE strategy from CIR to JR

> data_ice_JR <- data_ice_CIR
> data_ice_JR$strategy[data_ice_JR$strategy=="CIR"] <- "JR"

Author: ```suggestion
data_ice_JR <- data_ice_CIR %>% 
    mutate(strategy = ifelse(strategy == "CIR", "JR", strategy))
```

To do this, the user needs to do three things:

1. Define a function implementing the new imputation strategy. 
2. Specify which patients use this strategy in the `data_ice` dataset provided to `draws()`.
3. Provide the imputation strategy function to `impute()`.

The imputation strategy function must take 3 arguments (`pars_group`, `pars_ref`, and `index_mar`) and calculates the mean and covariance matrix of the subject's marginal imputation distribution which will then be applied to subjects to which the strategy applies. 
Here, `pars_group` contains the predicted mean trajectory (`pars_group$mu`, a numeric vector) and covariance matrix (`pars_group$sigma`) for a subject conditional on their assigned treatment group and covariates.
`pars_ref` contains the corresponding mean trajectory and covariance matrix conditional on the reference group and the subject's covariates.
`index_mar` is a logical vector which specifies for each visit whether the visit is unaffected by an ICE handled using a non-MAR method or not.
As an example, the user can check how the CIR strategy was implemented by looking at function `strategy_CIR()`.

```{r}
strategy_CIR
```

> To further illustrate this for a simple example, assume that a strategy is to be implemented according to which the marginal mean of the imputation distribution is equal to the marginal mean trajectory for the subject according to their assigned group and covariates up to the ICE and equal to the average of the visit-wise marginal means based on the subjects covariates and the assigned group or the reference group, respectively.
> For the covariance matrix of the marginal imputation distribution, the covariance matrix from the assigned group is taken. 

Author: Could be better to split this long sentence into bullet points (e.g. as follows):
```suggestion
To further illustrate this for a simple example, assume that a new strategy is to be implemented as follows:
- The marginal mean of the imputation distribution is equal to the marginal mean trajectory for the subject according to their assigned group and covariates up to the ICE.
- After the ICE the marginal mean of the imputation distribution is equal to the average of the visit-wise marginal means based on the subjects covariates and the assigned group or the reference group, respectively.
- For the covariance matrix of the marginal imputation distribution, the covariance matrix from the assigned group is taken. 
```

parsT$prob_ice1 <- probDisc_T

# Set assumption about post-ice trajectory
post_ice_traj <- "CIR"

# Simulate data
data <- simulate_data(
    pars_c = parsC,
    pars_t = parsT,
    post_ice_traj = post_ice_traj
)
```

Note that `simulate_data()` requires 3 arguments: 

- `pars_c`: The simulation parameters of the control arm
- `pars_t`: The simulation parameters of the intervention arm
- `post_ice_traj`: Specify how observed outcomes occurring after ICE1 are simulated

For more information about this function, please refer to the function documentation `help(simulate_data)`.

# Management of post-ICE observed values handled with a reference-based assumption {#sec:postICEobs}

The simulated trial explained in section \@ref(sec:dataSimul) assumes that outcomes in the active arm observed after the ICE "treatment discontinuation" follow the increments observed in the control arm.
Thus the imputation of missing data in the active arm after treatment discontinuation might be performed under the CIR assumption. How `rbmi` deals with observed values after an ICE handled using a reference-based method, is to include them in the analysis model but exclude them from the imputation model.

> Let's first set-up the estimator: Suppose that imputation model has the mean change from baseline as the outcome, includes the treatment group, the (categorical) visit, treatment-by-visit interactions, the baseline outcome, and baseline outcome-by-visit interactions as covariates, and assumes a common unstructured covariance matrix in both groups.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's first set-up the estimator: Suppose that imputation model has:
- The mean change from baseline as the outcome
- Includes the treatment group, the (categorical) visit, treatment-by-visit interactions, the baseline outcome, and baseline outcome-by-visit interactions as covariates
- Assumes a common unstructured covariance matrix in both groups.
```

The analysis model is ANCOVA that also adjusts for the baseline outcome value. Below we report the code to set the variables of the imputation and analysis models.
For details on the basic set-up to call the key rbmi functions, please refer to the "quickstart" vignette (`vignette("quickstart")`).

```{r}

# Create data_ice: CIR strategy for each patient in the active arm who stops the treatment
data_ice_CIR <- data %>%

>     group_by(id = factor(id, levels = unique(id))) %>%

Author: ```suggestion
    group_by(id) %>%
```

The purpose of this vignette is to provide an overview of some of the more advanced
features of the `rbmi` package. 

# Data simulation {#sec:dataSimul}

In order to demonstrate the advanced functions we will first create a simulated dataset with the `rbmi` function `simulate_data()`.
A reader interested in other sections of the vignette must not necessarly read through this section.

> The `simulate_data()` function generates data for a two-arms clinical trial with longitudinal continuous outcome and two intercurrent events (ICEs).

Reviewer: Maybe misleading as its "up to two ICEs per subject" its not guarenteed to generate 2 ICEs  (and ambigious if you mean overall or per patient

Author: Agreed

> The `simulate_data()` function generates data for a two-arms clinical trial with longitudinal continuous outcome and two intercurrent events (ICEs).

Author: ```suggestion
The `simulate_data()` function generates data for a two-arms clinical trial with longitudinal continuous outcome and up to two intercurrent events (ICEs).
```

> One intercurrent event (ICE1) may be thought of as a discontinuation from study treatment due to study drug or condition related (SDCR) reasons.

Reviewer: "may be" ?  Surely that is what it is ?

Reviewer: Perhaps, "The ICE1 intercurrent event represents discontinuation from ..."

Author: mmm, strong preference on this? 

I think sometimes one could model similarly other type of intercurrent events through ICE1. ICE1 represents an ICE that happens more or less likely depending on the current outcome value. Sometimes this could also be e.g start of symptomatic treatment? Could it be used to model death in certain settings? (even though the post-ice1 trajectory is done under a reference-based method, this usually makes sense mainly for treatment discontinuation...)

Reviewer 2: We could also just be neutral and say that the occurrence of ICE1 may depend on the observed outcome value and that the function allows to simulate post-ICE1 outcomes under reference-based assumptions. For example, ICE1 could be a a discontinuation from study treatment due to study drug or condition related (SDCR) reasons.

The other one (ICE2) may be thought of as discontinuation from study treatment due to uninformative study drop-out.
For the purposes of this vignette we consider the following scenario which is similar to the simulation study used in @Wolbers2021.

> It is a trial of an active drug versus placebo with 100 subjects per group and 6 post-baseline assessments (bi-monthly visits until 12 months):

Reviewer: Perhaps reword, it just doesn't seem qutie right, at least the opener of "it is a trial" doesn't read quite right to me.

Author: "Let's consider a trial of ...."

> It is a trial of an active drug versus placebo with 100 subjects per group and 6 post-baseline assessments (bi-monthly visits until 12 months):

Author: ```suggestion
Let's assume a trial of an active drug versus placebo with 100 subjects per group and 6 post-baseline assessments (bi-monthly visits until 12 months):
```

- Study drug discontinuation had no effect on the mean trajectory in the placebo group. In the active group, subjects who discontinued followed the slope of the mean trajectory from the placebo group from that time point onward (CIR). 
- Study drop-out at the study drug discontinuation visit occurred with a probability of 75% leading to missing outcome data from that time point onward.

This scenario can be implemented as follows:

```{r}
library(rbmi)
library(dplyr)

set.seed(135)
n <- 100
time <- seq(0, 12, by = 2)

# Mean trajectory control
muC <- 50 + (10 / 12) * time

# Mean trajectory intervention
muT <- 50 + (10 / 12) * time - (5 / 12) * pmax(time - 4, 0)

# Create Sigma
sd_intercept <- 5
sd_slope <- 5
cor_slopeInter <- 0.25
sd_error <- 2.5
covRE <- matrix(
    c(
        sd_intercept^2,
        cor_slopeInter * sd_intercept * sd_slope,
        cor_slopeInter * sd_intercept * sd_slope,
        sd_slope^2
    ),
    ncol = 2
)

> Sigma <- cbind(1, time / 12) %*% covRE %*% rbind(1, time / 12) + diag(sd_error^2, nrow = length(time))

Reviewer: To me this just seems like quite a lot of code which I feel is likely to lose a reader unless they are actively running the code snippits in parallel.  Is it viabe to simplify this at all?  Or maybe instead just hand write the values instead of deriving them so its more explicit to the reader ?

Reviewer 2: I think it would be nice to hand-write some of this, e.g. time, muC, muT, and covRE. I would keep the formula for Sigma.

Author: ok, will do it

# Set simulation parameters of the control arm
parsC <- set_simul_pars(
    mu = muC,
    sigma = Sigma,
    n = n,
    prob_ice1 = probDisc_C,
    or_outcome_ice1 = or_outcome,
    prob_post_ice1_dropout = prob_postDisc_dropout
)

# Set simulation parameters of the active arm
parsT <- parsC
parsT$mu <- muT
parsT$prob_ice1 <- probDisc_T

# Set assumption about post-ice trajectory
post_ice_traj <- "CIR"

# Simulate data
data <- simulate_data(
    pars_c = parsC,
    pars_t = parsT,
    post_ice_traj = post_ice_traj
)
```

Note that `simulate_data()` requires 3 arguments: 

- `pars_c`: The simulation parameters of the control arm
- `pars_t`: The simulation parameters of the intervention arm
- `post_ice_traj`: Specify how observed outcomes occurring after ICE1 are simulated

For more information about this function, please refer to the function documentation `help(simulate_data)`.

# Management of post-ICE observed values handled with a reference-based assumption {#sec:postICEobs}

The simulated trial explained in section \@ref(sec:dataSimul) assumes that outcomes in the active arm observed after the ICE "treatment discontinuation" follow the increments observed in the control arm.

> Thus the imputation of missing data in the active arm after treatment discontinuation might be performed under the CIR assumption. How `rbmi` deals with observed values after an ICE handled using a reference-based method, is to include them in the analysis model but exclude them from the imputation model.

Reviewer: "might be" ?

Author: ""
```suggestion
Thus we impute missing data in the active arm after treatment discontinuation under the CIR assumption. How `rbmi` deals with observed values after an ICE handled using a reference-based method, is to include them in the analysis model but exclude them from the imputation model.
```

> Let's first set-up the estimator: Suppose that imputation model has the mean change from baseline as the outcome, includes the treatment group, the (categorical) visit, treatment-by-visit interactions, the baseline outcome, and baseline outcome-by-visit interactions as covariates, and assumes a common unstructured covariance matrix in both groups.

Reviewer: Perhaps convert into a bullet point list for clarity ?

The analysis model is ANCOVA that also adjusts for the baseline outcome value. Below we report the code to set the variables of the imputation and analysis models.
For details on the basic set-up to call the key rbmi functions, please refer to the "quickstart" vignette (`vignette("quickstart")`).

```{r}

# Create data_ice: CIR strategy for each patient in the active arm who stops the treatment
data_ice_CIR <- data %>%

>     group_by(id = factor(id, levels = unique(id))) %>%

Reviewer: Generally bad practice to do a mutation inside of a group by statement, but anyway I think after the recent change to `simulate_data` this can be removed now ?

>     mutate(

Reviewer: This mutate block feels redundant to me, why not just put the logic in the filter block ?

Author: done

      is_interv = group == "Intervention",
      has_ice = any(ind_ice1 == 1)
    ) %>%

>     filter(is_interv & has_ice) %>% # Select pts in active arm that disc from treatment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    filter(is_interv, has_ice) %>% # Select pts in active arm that disc from treatment
```

    summarise(
        visit = visit[ind_ice1 == 1][1] # Select first visit affected by the ICE
    )
data_ice_CIR$strategy <- "CIR"

# Compute change from baseline
data$change <- data$outcome - data$outcome_bl

# Remove rows corresponding to baseline visit
data <- data[data$visit %in% levels(data$visit)[-1], ]

> data$visit <- factor(data$visit, levels <- unique(data$visit))

Reviewer: Considering this is a vignette I think we should be consistent with our logic and try to stick to dplyr as much as possible (i.e. where possible avoid switching between base and dplyr to make it read cleaner)

vars <- set_vars(
    subjid = "id",
    visit = "visit",
    outcome = "change",
    group = "group",
    covariates = c("visit*outcome_bl", "visit*group"),
    strategy = "strategy"
    )

vars_an <- vars
vars_an$covariates <- "outcome_bl"

```

> Let's assume that the chosen multiple imputation (MI) method is the approximate Bayesian MI with 10 imputations that can be set with the function `method_approxbayes()` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say that the chosen multiple imputation (MI) method is the approximate Bayesian MI with 10 imputations; this can be specified with the function `method_approxbayes()` as follows:
```

```{r}
method <- method_approxbayes(n_sample = 10)
```

> We can now call sequentially the 4 key functions of `rbmi` to perform the multiple imputation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now sequentially call the 4 key functions of `rbmi` to perform the multiple imputation.
```

Please note that the management of post-discontinuation observed data is performed without additional complexity for the user.

> `draws()` automatically excludes post-ICE data handled with a reference-based method using information provided by the argument `data_ice`.

Reviewer: > with a reference-based method

Was just thinking that we only keep "MAR" data. But we still exclude LMCF data but this isn't strictly a reference method is it ?

Author: I think it is correct to exclude post-ICE data that follow a LMCF assumption, since this is not compatible with a MAR assumptions assumed by the base imputation model (MMRM)

> `impute()` will impute only actual missing data in `data[[vars$outcome]]`.

Reviewer: I'm guessing you were trying to highlight here that missing data in  the covariates is not handled ? If so is it worth just stating that a bit more explicitly otherwise this sentance seems almost a bit out of place to me.

Author: I want to say that impute() will consider as non-missing those observed values that are artificially set to NA in draws() because they follow a non-MAR assumption... That is, impute() imputed only acutal missing data as provided in the dataset from the user. Happy to rewrite it

```{r}
set.seed(123)

> draw_obj <- draws(

Reviewer: You might want to use the `quiet=TRUE` argument here unless you wanted draw's progress logs appearing in the vignette ?

Author: done

    data = data,
    data_ice = data_ice_CIR,
    vars = vars,
    method = method
)

impute_obj_CIR <- impute(
    draw_obj,
    references = c("Control" = "Control", "Intervention" = "Intervention")
)

ana_obj_CIR <- analyse(
    impute_obj_CIR,
    vars = vars_an
)

pool(ana_obj_CIR)
```

# Adding time-varying covariates in the imputation model

> `rbmi` allows to include time-varying covariates in the imputation model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`rbmi` allows for the inclusion of time-varying covariates in the imputation model.
```

For example, lets suppose that we want to implement an estimator equivalent to the one described in section \@ref(sec:postICEobs) with the following differences:

- There is an additional time-varying covariate that represents the number of visits from the ICE treatment discontinuation. This is set equal to 0 up to the treatment discontinuation and to the time from treatment discontinuation

> at subsequent visits. Additionally a treatment by time-varying covariate interaction terms is included in the model. This variable allows to estimate the post-ICE trajectory in each arm directly from the data, without explicitly making apriori any (reference-based) assumption.

Author: ```suggestion
at subsequent visits. 
- Additionally a treatment by time-varying covariate interaction terms is included in the model. This variable allows to estimate the post-ICE trajectory in each arm directly from the data, without explicitly making apriori any (reference-based) assumption.
```

> - The imputation is performed under MAR.

Reviewer: This just looks a bit weird given you have 1 super long sentance and 1 short one both in bullet points,  perhaps just have two short bullet points and extract the qualifying text to a paragraph beneath it ?

Author: Ok, I separated the long sentence into 2 bullet points

Indeed, one could assume that post-ICE data are missing-at-random after taking into account baseline characteristics, observed outcomes and additional information regarding the time of the ICE. For a precise description of this approach, we refer to @Guizzaro2021.

Let's first compute the time-varying covariate:

```{r}
data <- data %>%
  group_by(id) %>%
  mutate(time_from_ice1 = cumsum(ind_ice1))
```

and include it in the imputation model, crossed with the `group` variable:

```{r}
vars_tv <- set_vars(
    subjid = "id",
    visit = "visit",
    outcome = "change",
    group = "group",
    covariates = c("visit*outcome_bl", "visit*group", "time_from_ice1*group"),
    strategy = "strategy"

>     )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
)
```

```

> We can now call sequentially the 4 key `rbmi` functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now sequentially call the 4 key `rbmi` functions:
```

```{r}
draw_obj <- draws(
    data = data,
    data_ice = NULL, # if NULL, MAR is assumed for every missing data
    vars = vars_tv,
    method = method
)

impute_obj_tv <- impute(
    draw_obj,

>     references = c("Control" = "Control", "Intervention" = "Intervention")

Reviewer: Is this correct ? As in are both groups meant to reference themselves ?

Author: Yes, I think this is correct, since we impute under MAR.

Author: We might change this and allow user to not need to specify `references` when imputation is under MAR

)

pool(ana_obj_tv)
```

# Efficiently Changing Imputation Strategies

The `draws()` function is by far the most computationally intensive function in `rbmi`.
In some settings, it may be important to explore the impact of a different
reference-based imputation strategy than the one chosen for the main analysis.
This change in the imputation strategy does not affect the imputation model but it does
affect the subsequent imputation step. 
In order to allow changes in the imputation strategy without having to re-run the 
`draws()` function, the function `impute()` has an additional argument `update_strategies`.

Please note though that this functionality comes with a some key limitations:
From a theoretical point of view, such updates are only sensible if the base imputation model and the data to which it is fitted are also applicable to the revised imputation strategy.
For example, as described in `help("draws", "rbmi")`, observed post-ICE data are included in the imputation model for the MAR strategy but excluded for non-MAR strategies.
For this reason, the imputation strategy cannot be changed from MAR to a non-MAR strategy in the presence of observed data after the ICE.

> Likewise, a change from a non-MAR to MAR in the presence of observed data after the ICE triggers a warning because the imputation model was not fitted to all relevant data and may be inefficient.

Reviewer: I still wonder if we should be more explicit than just "inefficient" as people could thing this means inefficient in terms of computing resources rather than not using all of the available data.

Author: We could just delete "..and may be inefficient"?

Author: Even if maybe it is clear enough that here inefficiency is not related to computing resources..

strategy_AVG(pars_group, pars_ref, index_mar)
```

To incorporate this into `rbmi`, `data_ice` needs to be updated such that the strategy `AVG` is specified for visits affected by the ICE. Additionally, the function needs
to be provided to `impute()` via the `getStrategies()` function as shown below:

```{r}

> data_ice_AVG <- data_ice_CIR
> data_ice_AVG$strategy[data_ice_AVG$strategy=="CIR"] <- "AVG"

Author: ```suggestion
data_ice_AVG <- data_ice_CIR %>% 
    mutate(strategy = ifelse(strategy == "CIR", "AVG", strategy))
```

}

# analyse
ana_obj_CIR6 <- analyse(impute_obj_CIR, vars = vars_an, fun = compare_change_lastvisit)

# pool
pool(ana_obj_CIR6)
```

As a second example, assume that for a supplementary analysis, the user wants to compare the proportion of subjects with a change from baseline of >10 points at the last 
visit between the treatment groups with the baseline outcome as an additional covariate. This could then lead to the following basic analysis function:

```{r}
# Basic analysis function
compare_prop_lastvisit <- function(data, ...) {
    fit <- glm(I(change>10) ~ group + outcome_bl, family=binomial(), data = data, subset=(visit==6) )
    res <- list(
        trt = list(
            est = coef(fit)["groupIntervention"],
            se = sqrt(vcov(fit)["groupIntervention", "groupIntervention"]),
            df = NA
        )
    )
    return(res)
}
    
# analyse
ana_obj_prop <- analyse(impute_obj_CIR, vars = vars_an, fun = compare_prop_lastvisit)

# pool
pool_obj_prop <- pool(ana_obj_prop)
pool_obj_prop

# convert treatment effect estimate from log-OR to OR scale
tmp <- as.data.frame(pool_obj_prop)
tmp$OR <- exp(tmp$est); tmp$OR.lci <- exp(tmp$lci); tmp$OR.uci <- exp(tmp$uci)

> tmp[,c("parameter","OR","OR.lci","OR.uci")]

Author: ```suggestion
tmp[, c("parameter", "OR", "OR.lci", "OR.uci")]
```

```

> Note that if the user wants `rbmi` to use a normal approximation to the pooled test statistics, then the degrees of freedom need to be set to `df = NA` (as per the above example). If the degrees of freedom of the complete data test statistics are known or if the degrees of freedom are set to `df = Inf`, then `rbmi` pools the degrees of freedom accross imputed datasets according to the rule by Barnard and Rubin (see the "Statistical Specifications" vignette (`vignette("stat_specs", package = "rbmi")` for details). According to this rule, infinite degrees of freedom for the complete data analysis do not imply that the pooled degrees of freedom are also infinite.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that if the user wants `rbmi` to use a normal approximation to the pooled test statistics, then the degrees of freedom need to be set to `df = NA` (as per the above example). If the degrees of freedom of the complete data test statistics are known or if the degrees of freedom are set to `df = Inf`, then `rbmi` pools the degrees of freedom accross imputed datasets according to the rule by Barnard and Rubin (see the "Statistical Specifications" vignette (`vignette("stat_specs", package = "rbmi")` for details). According to this rule, infinite degrees of freedom for the complete data analysis does not imply that the pooled degrees of freedom are also infinite.
```

# Delta Adjustment

> A delta-adjustment refers to a shift in the distribution of the (unobserved) outcome values by a certain amount. This might be used to perform sensitivity analyses.

Reviewer: Would it be better to say "imputed" rather than "unobserved"  as the unobserved values never actually change, we just don't know them ?

Reviewer: Also "might be" ?

> A delta-adjustment refers to a shift in the distribution of the (unobserved) outcome values by a certain amount. This might be used to perform sensitivity analyses.

Author: ```suggestion
A delta-adjustment refers to a shift in the distribution of the (imputed) outcome values by a certain amount. This can be used to perform sensitivity analyses.
```

In the context of multiple imputation (MI), this is typically done by adding a fixed amount to the imputed values used in the primary analysis.
This implies that the delta-adjustment can be performed prior to the third stage of the MI process: The fit of the analysis model (`analyse()`).

> That is, there is no additional consistent computational time needed to perform this type of sensitivity analysis since there is no need to re-fit the imputation model.

Reviewer: Not sure "consistent" is the right word here. Perhaps just re-phrase as, "this means this type of sensitivity analysis can be perforemed without having to re-fit the imputation model"

> That is, there is no additional consistent computational time needed to perform this type of sensitivity analysis since there is no need to re-fit the imputation model.

Author: ```suggestion
This means this type of sensitivity analysis can be perforemed without having to re-fit the imputation model
```

For details, please see @CroEtAlTutorial2020.

## Manually set `delta` {#sec:manualDelta}

The `delta` argument of `analyse()` allows users to modify the outcome variable prior to the analysis.

> To do this, the user needs to provide a `data.frame` containing a column for the subject

Reviewer: containing columns for **both** the subject and visit

> To do this, the user needs to provide a `data.frame` containing a column for the subject

Author: ```suggestion
To do this, the user needs to provide a `data.frame` containing columns for both the subject
```

```{r}
dat_delta <- delta_template(imputations = impute_obj_CIR)
head(dat_delta)
```

Note that the output of `delta_template()` contains additional information that can be used to properly set the delta.

Using the example described in section \@ref(sec:dataSimul), let's say that we want to perform a delta-strategy where the delta applies to all imputed data after treatment discontinuation (regardless of the treatment arm).
Assume that we want to fix `delta` proportional to the unadjusted observed mean change from baseline of the outcome value over all trial population.
That is, we add `delta` to an imputed data after treatment discontinuation at a given visit proportional to the observed mean change from baseline at that visit.
Let's first determine the observed mean change from baseline at each visit:

```{r}
# Estimate mean change from baseline at each visit
mean_chg <- data %>%
    group_by(visit) %>%
    summarise(delta = mean(change, na.rm = TRUE))
mean_chg
```
Note that `na.rm = TRUE` is used to ignore the missing data.

Suppose that we want to apply a delta equal to the $20\%$ of the mean change from baseline, i.e.: 
```{r} 
deltas <- mean_chg

> deltas$delta <- 0.2 * mean_chg$delta

Reviewer: Try to avoid mix and matching dplyr and base R. I think we should be consistant

In the previous section (\@ref(sec:manualDelta)) we have added a delta to any imputed value after treatment discontinuation proportional to the observed mean change from baseline at the corresponding visit.
We have set the proportion equal to 20%. We can vary the proportion up to when the treatment effect estimated at the last visit is not significant anymore.

Let's start by writing a function that performs a delta-adjustment based on a proportion of the observed mean change from baseline.
This function needs as arguments the object resulting from the imputation phase (`impute_obj`), a `data.frame` containing the mean change from baseline at each visit (`mean_chg`) and a number indicating the chosen proportion (`prop`):

```{r}
delta_adj <- function(impute_obj, mean_chg, prop) {

    # Get delta template dataset
    dat_delta <- delta_template(imputations = impute_obj)

    # Estimate delta values
    mean_chg$delta <- prop * mean_chg$delta

    # Select observations corresponding to missing values after the ICE

>     index_delta <- dat_delta$is_missing & dat_delta$is_post_ice

Reviewer: Again lets not mix base and dplyr

    # Include the value of delta from "mean_chg" to "dat_delta" by joining the two data.frames
    dat_delta[index_delta, ] <- dat_delta %>%
        filter(is_missing & is_post_ice) %>%
        select(-delta) %>%
        left_join(mean_chg, by = "visit")

    # Repeat analyses with the delta-adjusted values and pool together the results
    anl_delta <- analyse(impute_obj, delta = dat_delta, vars = vars_an)
    pool_obj <- pool(anl_delta)

    # Return the results together with the proportion used and the delta values
    pool_obj$prop <- prop
    pool_obj$delta <- mean_chg
    return(pool_obj)
}

```

To perform the tipping point analysis, we loop over increasing values of the proportion and we stop when the p-value is above the desired confidence level (we assume that it is equal to 0.05).

```{r}
prop <- seq(from = 0.1, to = 1, by = 0.1)

iter <- 1
p_val <- 0

> while (p_val <= 0.05 & iter <= length(prop)) {

Reviewer: I would avoid a while loop, I would simply just run all of the range and then call out the one that tripped the threshold. Only for the sole reason that while loops can be hard to get your head round at times for a reader.

Author: Marcel wants to change this as well. I will not resolve this conversation and I will have a look again after his changes.
